JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a health
care story about providing
help to those who need it most.
Even as the debate over
replacing the Affordable
Care Act continues,
one California city has
come up with an
innovative solution to
an intractable problem.
Special correspondent
Kathleen McCleery reports
from Alameda County.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: On the south
edge of the city of Hayward sits
a neighborhood with especially
high rates of poverty,
unemployment and violent crime.
People are sicker, too.
Many suffer from
diabetes, obesity, asthma
and other ailments.
Options for care
here are limited.
There's just one hospital,
and few doctors welcome
Medicaid patients.
Some call it a
health care desert.
ALEX BRISCOE, Former Director,
Alameda County Health Care
Services: South Hayward is the
poster child for lack of
access to primary care.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: When Alex
Briscoe was with Alameda County
Health Care Services -- he
was agency director for six
years -- he hunted for ways
to improve access to care.
In 2009, as he coped with the
swine flu, or H1N1, epidemic,
Briscoe had a light bulb moment.
ALEX BRISCOE: Firefighters
joined our public health nurses
and many other providers, and
we very successfully
vaccinated, immunized hundreds
of thousands of people.
MAN: Airway aids
and tracheal tubes.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Briscoe
wondered if firefighters
skilled as trained
paramedics could help solve
another piece of the
health care puzzle.
ALEX BRISCOE: This H1N1
experience, combined with our
already robust relationship with
fire on the EMS system,
it's kind of like peanut
butter and chocolate.
Do these two ideas go together,
and is there a way for us
to use this already existing
resource and preexisting
trust as well?
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Trust,
because approval ratings for
firefighters far exceed other
public servants.
That got officials here
thinking about how to leverage
manpower and location.
Kristel Acacio runs special
projects for the county agency.
KRISTEL ACACIO, Alameda County
Health Care Services Agency:
Fire stations, firefighters
are strategically located
in every community.
So we saw this as an existing,
but perhaps untapped resource
to serve our patient population.
Around the fire station,
there is a concentration
of low-income residents.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: When Acacio
examined data about that
population, she discovered that
the neediest area was just
where the county planned to
build a new fire station.
KRISTEL ACACIO: And what we
can see in this map is that
in Hayward, and in particular
in South Hayward, that
the concentration of
avoidable emergency
department visits is 1.5
times or greater
the county rate.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: County
health officials seized the
chance to collaborate with the
city, a community health center
and a nonprofit architectural
firm to design and build two
structures on the same campus.
They opened in late 2015.
The clinic is right in
front of us, and the fire
station is right here.
GARRETT CONTRERAS, Hayward Fire
Chief: Yes, the same style.
They look integrated, and
basically taking advantage of
that sort of known trust and
location.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Fire
chief Garrett Contreras was
a supporter from the start.
GARRETT CONTRERAS: Upwards of
70 percent of our 911 calls
in the Hayward Fire Department
are for medical emergencies.
Some of these more routine-type
medical problems can be treated
at a much lower-cost setting
and keep the emergency
room beds available for
our most critical patients.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Reducing
the number of transports to
the E.R. is one way to measure
success, says David B.
Vliet, CEO of the Tiburcio
Vasquez Health Center,
which runs eight community
clinics, including this one.
DAVID B. VLIET, CEO, Tiburcio
Vasquez Health Center: Because
we have delivered 6,000 urgent
care, convenient care visits
here, those are visits that
didn't go to the E.R., so right
away we know we have
kept that volume out
of the emergency room.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: But
not everything went
according to plan.
KRISTEL ACACIO: Initially, what
we wanted the firefighters to
do was that we could possibly
dedicate a couple paramedics
to actually work in the clinic.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: That idea
was quickly squelched by the
California Nurses Association.
Karen Rothblatt has been
a nurse for 30 years.
KAREN ROTHBLATT, California
Nurses Association: You wouldn't
want me to come and respond to
you in that critical
first moment.
It's not what my
training is about.
Same, turn that around, I
think you could say that a
paramedic hasn't been trained to
do what a nurse has been
trained to do, so why would
you have them do that?
I think it would be
putting people at risk.
ALEX BRISCOE: My first thought
is the "Family Feud sound.
Look, no nurse would say that
while a paramedic is trache-ing
them or starting an I.V. line
Paramedics are extremely highly
trained, and highly skilled,
and I think that they can
do far more than what they're
currently doing, if we remember
that the point of our health
care delivery system is to
serve people, not to protect
health care market share.
KAREN ROTHBLATT: Well, I find
that insulting, actually.
There are jobs out
there for nurses.
It's not about that.
It's really, really about
making sure that that clinic
really functions in a way that
is best for the patients
that arrive there.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: At
the clinic, patients
are seen by a nurse
practitioner or physician's
assistant.
No doctor is on staff
yet, but they say they
are hiring one soon.
Firefighters are close by if
the clinic needs lifesaving
care for heart attacks, strokes
or to get patients to a
fully staffed emergency room.
And proximity promotes
communication, too.
Those in the field, like Captain
LaShon Earnest, encourage
people to use the clinic.
CAPT.
LASHON EARNEST, Hayward
Fire Department: We go on
a lot of calls where we
can make a determination
where somebody who doesn't
necessarily need to go
to the emergency room,
the tax the system.
For something -- say,
for a stubbed toe, this
is someone that could
probably use the clinic.
Well, did you know the
clinic was right next
door to the firehouse?
Oh, I didn't know that.
OK.
Well, maybe I'm fine
right now, I don't need
to go to the hospital.
I will have my mother drive
me tomorrow to the clinic.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Tina
Greives lost her insurance
after an on-the- job
injury as a long-distance
trucker.
For her, the location, next to
the fire station, is convenient.
TINA GREIVES, Patient: I don't
have a vehicle, which is unusual
for somebody in California.
This one is just seriously
within walking distance if
I'm doing good, or a 15-minute
bus ride.
So, it's in a perfect location.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: Greives,
like most treated in this
clinic, qualifies for Medicaid.
More than 120,000 people in
Alameda County were added to
the rolls with the passage of
the Affordable Care Act.
The uncertainty over health
care in Washington is causing
worry here in South Hayward.
Cuts to Medicaid could reduce
a key funding stream for this
clinic, keeping it from being
self-sustaining in
the coming years.
And that's a concern for
providers and patients alike.
TINA GREIVES: I wouldn't
be covered by the new bill.
That's all there is to it, and
it's just like, holy dirty word.
So, it's an uncertainty,
and it's scary.
DAVID B. VLIET: Ultimately, it
means that more folks cannot
be seen in a health center
like this, and would
not have a paying source
in order to do that.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: The
partnership of firefighters
and health care workers
is a first for California.
ALEX BRISCOE: The attempt to
bridge the 911 system and the
primary care system, I think
that's a unique experiment.
GARRETT CONTRERAS: I do
believe it can be a model.
I do believe it will
be -- can be repeated.
It's not easy.
Not so easy to do to get
multiple governmental
agencies to work together,
drop the boundaries,
drop the egos, drop the who said
what, who's doing what, who's
getting credit for anything,
and just do it because
it's the right thing
to do and it'll improve
service to the community.
KATHLEEN MCCLEERY: I'm Kathleen
McCleery for the "PBS NewsHour"
in Hayward, California.